Mass Media - Pro Palestine Encampments on College Campuses

--

    This October, the Israel-Palestine conflict re-entered the public eye in a fiery rage with Hamas attacking at the Gaza Strip. Since then, unlike ever before, first-hand accounts of the atrocities coming from Israel and Palestine have been plastered all over social media. Along with these disturbing images comes the outrage of millions---politically-oriented young men and women condemning what Israel is doing to the Palestinian people. But, the outrage is not contained to social media warriors. Now, college campuses have been subject to Pro-Palestinian encampments with student activists who are protesting in solidarity for the people of Palestine. These activists rage on campuses like UCLA and Columbia, or in small numbers protest peacefully like at UIUC and SIUC, for which we have first accounts.
    It is important to move through the timeline of the protests, which can be found from sources like Reuters and the Associated Press (AP).
    First, on April 17, the Columbia University Manhattan campus sees the start of a pro-Palestine student encampment---a direct response to the university's president, Minouche Shafik, taking a stand against antisemitism in a congressional hearing also on April 17 [1]. Reuters then reports the next day, President Shafik orders police to remove the encampment from campus, which leads to the arrests of over 100 protesters [2]. Already, in the light of strong emotions during the protests, there is a battle between the right to protest, and a protest that remains peaceful. In the days to come, as the protesters fire could not be put out, Columbia University was forced to cancel all classes on April 22. Riot police flowing through occupied buildings at the university, like Hamilton Hall, in attempts to restore normal order to campus operations. Reports of the Hamilton Hall raid include shots fired from riot police. At the same time, the campus grounds are filled with protester's tents as the sleep overnight and protest during the day, trying as hard as possible to not relent their ground. While this is effective at disturbing the administration of the university, all students are also being forced out of valuable class time at a stressful time nearing the end of the Spring semester.
    Similarly across the country, pro-Palestine tent encampments were put up at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). Quickly, the situation on the UCLA campus went from peacful to violent. Pro-Israel protesters faced the tent encampments head on, which in the heat of political disagreement became unstable, where even live mice were being thrown at the pro-Palestine campers [4]. Proceeding violence eventually resulted in the injury of at least 15 protestors; which led the eyes of politicans from the State of California and Washington D.C. to speak on the degrading levels of safety at UCLA. President Joe Biden while defending each student's right to a peaceful protest, he condemns any acts of violence, as he states, "Dissent is essential for democracy. But dissent must never lead to disorder," [5]. However, President Biden still refused to send the National Guard to enforce stability.
    In the light of the violence, and boiling emotions on these campuses, some believe non-student protestors, insighters, wrongly found their way into the encampments to stir unrest. And others, blame the police for being the true causes of violence, since it takes acts of force in order to "bring order". The sites of the protests echo the violent conflict around the Gaza strip, as police throw flashbangs and shoot rubber bullets at protestors who are throwing anything they can back in retaliation [6]. At universities, typically safe places, the peaceful discussions are now replaced with screams, launched flares, and bulldozers removing protestors tents.
    In response to all of this, as some universities have already cancelled classes, some are being pushed to cancel graduation. Especially, since university administrations are being pulled in two directions, since some believe they're not doing enough to support rights to protest, but also they might be jeprodizing the safety of their student body. Students at schools like the University of Michigan are afraid of missing out on commencement, due to protests completely unrelated to all of the hardwork they invested in their education [7]. University of Illinois Urbana-Champange students Jessica St. Pierre and Ramsey El Lethy, who were interviewed for this story, spoke of their own concerns for the upcoming UIUC graduation weekend. Here, college campuses are going to have to take the hit and pay for security to ensure that students and their incoming families can enjoy the achievements of the new graduating class.
    However, not all college campuses in the country are experiencing the same levels of violence regarding Israel-Palestine protests. The Associate Press compared the protest climate in Boston. They report that MIT, Harvard and Northeastern experienced pro-Palestine encampments, but Boston College did not [8]. The difference here being the faculty's approach to the subject. Instead of administration making bold statements for or against a side, they held constructive discussions and a vigil. And coupled with the peaceful approach to protest, students at Boston College who were interviewed talked about a general "laziness" when it came to the conflict. While activism is needed for important issues like these, busy students nearing the end of a tiring school year want to relax, focus on their finals, and make it graduation.
    At UIUC, St. Pierre and El Lethy watch from a distance on The Main Quad at the tents that are set up in what is labelled the "UIUC Liberation Zone". El Lethy and Pierre both state that the encampment protestors have, "been sleeping here for three days now,". Compared to the protests going on at UCLA and Columbia, this protest is still a small display. However, tensions are not low. St. Pierre describes, "there are pro-Israel protestors set up at the Alma Mater," where students are placing Israel flags on the statue and dancing.  Her concerns growing she says, "I just feel like people are fueling the fire." But, they say a large police prescence is on campus monitoring the situation.
    On the SIUC campus, on Monday April 29, a small pro-Palestine encampment emerged on the lawn in front of Morris Library. Carbondale police swiftly set metal fencing around the group, and were seen to be watching at a distance from the library. Chase Lotito, a junior at SIU, while studying on the 3rd floor that day said, "as I was working, I noticed about 10 police officers watching the protestors from the windows." The quick reponse from the Carbondale Police allowed students both to speak their minds, while at the same time prevent any possible escalation on campus. 
    Across the nation, developments on college encampments are still active and ongoing. 




-- SOURCES --
[1] Associated Press - Columbia’s president rebuts claims she has allowed the university to become a hotbed of antisemitism -> https://apnews.com/article/columbia-president-congress-israel-hamas-antisemitism-3255357b4443c1fb4bae8b8ea5774ee5

[2] Reuters - Major events in Pro-Palestinian protests at US universities -> https://www.reuters.com/world/us/pro-palestinian-encampments-us-universities-2024-05-02/

[3] Associated Press - Police clear pro-Palestinian protesters from Columbia University’s Hamilton Hall -> https://apnews.com/article/israel-palestinian-campus-student-protests-war-8b0d3a0cedb17f5e892c6ca43bbdf628

[4] Associated Press - More than 2100 people have been arrested during pro-Palestinian protests on US college campuses -> https://apnews.com/article/israel-palestinian-campus-student-protests-war-ec3f62c51c08599f8fcecd99f7cf9e33

[5] NBC New York - Biden defends student's right to protests but condemns campus violence as schools crack down on encampments -> https://www.nbcnewyork.com/news/national-international/us-campus-protests-police-ucla-encampment/5375640/

[6] Los Angeles Times - UCLA struggles to recover after 200 arrested, pro-Palestinian camp torn down -> https://www.latimes.com/california/story/2024-05-01/la-me-ucla-camp-police

[7] ABC News - Universities take steps to prevent pro-Palestinian protest disruptions of graduation ceremonies -> https://abcnews.go.com/US/wireStory/universities-steps-prevent-pro-palestinian-protest-disruptions-graduation-109894116

[8] U.S. News / Associated Press - Student Protests Take Over Some Campuses. At Others, Attention in Elsewhere -> https://www.usnews.com/news/us/articles/2024-05-01/student-protests-take-over-some-campuses-at-others-attention-is-elsewhere
